                 Braverman Personality Type Assessment

Total Results Summary

1A Total Number of True Responses:  DOPAMINE NATURE
2A Total Number of True Responses:  ACETYLCHOLINE NATURE
3A Total Number of True Responses:  GABA NATURE
4A Total Number of True Responses:  SEROTONIN NATURE

DOPAMINE NATURE If you have a dopamine nature, you are part of 17% of the population.
When you are balanced, you are likely to be strong-willed who knows exactly what you want and
how to get it. You are fast on your feet and self-confident. You are highly rational, more
comfortable with facts and figures than with feelings and emotions. You are able to assess
yourself critically, but you may not respond well to the criticisms of others. You focus intently on
the task at hand and take pride in achievement. Strategic thinking, masterminding, inventing,
problem solving, envisioning, and pragmatism are exciting and you function well under stress. A
majority of doctors, scientists, researchers, inventors, engineers, generals and architects are
dopamine dominant, but this does not preclude you from other professions. You may like to play
chess, listen to books on tape, or do difficult crossword puzzles. You are tireless, perhaps overly
alert, and may need less sleep than others. When exercising, you may enjoy weight-lifting more
than aerobic activities. You may not be overly sensitive and miss it when others consider their
feelings more important than your reasons. You may be distant from your children, and the
stability of your marriage may depend on the loyalty and goodwill of your spouse.

Excessive dopamine Too much dopamine can lead to excessive risk-taking behaviors and
impulsive actions. Violence and over-control of others may be recurrent problems. Sexual
activity level might be too high for sustained relationships to endure, as extramarital sexual
activity may result. As teenagers, reckless driving, shoplifting, or date rape may result if you did
not learn to balance your dopamine extremes in time.

ACETYLCHOLINE NATURE You are adept at working with your senses and view the world in
sensory terms. You are highly creative and open to new ideas. You are a quick thinker who is
always taking other people into consideration. You are devoted to making things the best they
can be, no matter how much effort it requires. You are flexible, creative, and spontaneous, and
are willing to try anything new as long as it promises to be new and exciting. If your
acetylcholine nature is in balance, you are intuitive and innovative. You take pleasure in
anything involving words, ideas, and communication. (Acetylcholine is produced to a great
extent in the parietal lobes of the brain, which is responsible for language, intelligence, and
comprehension) You may be ideal in the roles as counselor, mediator, think tank member, yoga
and meditation instructor, religious leader, and in public service. Strong acetylcholine levels are
associated with high brain speed, which impacts the creative function, so artists, writers,
advertising professionals, and actors are frequently acetylcholine dominant. You are extremely
social, even charismatic. You love meeting and greeting and making new friends. You come
across to others as authentic and grounded. People find you charming, and you find
relationships come easy to you. You invest a great deal of energy and time into your
relationships and feel that you are personally reaping the rewards. You are an optimist, and your
see the possibilities in people. You are attentive to the needs of children and romantic with you
significant other. You are good at remembering other people's feelings and reactions, and this
enables you to not hurt others. You are altruistic and benevolent. You love adventure. You are
open to new things and not afraid of failure. You like to travel, but you can also enjoy reading
about the lives of others. Your quest for learning makes you interested in a variety of topics and
adept at sharing your knowledge with others.

                                                                                                      4
Too Much Acetylcholine You may give too much of yourself, to the point of not considering
your own needs or becoming masochistic. You may feel the world is taking advantage of you, or
become paranoid. You may become socially isolated as a result. Panic disorder, manic
episodes, or anxiety can result.

GABA NATURE A person with a GABA nature is stable. Almost 50% of the world share this
nature, whose hallmarks are consistency, sociability, and concern for others. If you have a
GABA nature, you will likely show up every day for work and be there when others need you.
When your GABA is in balance, you remain calm when chaos swirls around you. Characteristics
of objectivity, levelheadedness, punctuality, practicality, and confidence all come naturally to you.
Staying organized is very important to you, and rigid schedules are comforting rather than
confining ­ they eliminate uncertainty and ensure smooth sailing. GABA dominant people tend
to gravitate to careers as administrators, accountants, security officers, nurses, medical
technicians, air-traffic controllers, news reporters, EMT's, meeting planners, bus drivers, and
homemakers. No matter what the job, the GABA-natured person is the one who tethers the
group, who stays focused on the matter at hand, yet usually defers to the majority. You are the
consummate team player, deriving pleasure from fulfilling your obligations and taking care of
those you love. You are sensible, settled, and not prone to wide swings of emotion or outbursts
of anger. You both relish group activities and cherish one-to-one connections. Making others
comfortable makes you happy. Marriage is seen as a long-term haven. You probably believe in
traditions and institutions, and enjoy your part in making them work, especially at your place of
worship. You look forward to holiday gatherings, and planning for them seems more like play
than work. You probably like history books and biographies. Collecting memorabilia and
creating scrapbooks may provide hours of entertainment. There are times when you feel you've
had a strong nurturing effect on others, such as after hosting a holiday dinner.

EXCESS GABA Producing too much GABA may ratchet up your nurturing tendencies to the
point where you ignore your own needs or end up getting hurt. You may spend too much energy
looking for love, and then relying too heavily on you mates. You may look too much to authority
figures for advice and continuously craving and following the advice of others.

SEROTONIN NATURE Serotonin resynchronizes your brain while you sleep so you wake every
morning with a fresh start. If you have a serotonin nature, you are among 17% of the population
who really know how to enjoy themselves. Serotonin is associated with delta waves (which are
produced in abundance when we sleep) and affects our ability to rest, regenerate, and find
security. If you have a serotonin nature, you know how to live in the moment. You are a realist,
keenly responsive to sensory input, yet you can be impulsive, too. You love to participate in
activities for the "love of the game" and not as a means to an end. Achievement to you means
getting something done now. You thrive on change ­ you'll alternate tasks and find new ways of
doing repetitive ones. You will try new foods, pick up a new hobby, and plan a different vacation
every year. When balanced, a person with a serotonin nature is receptive to stimuli, in touch
with both mind and body, often physically coordinated, and very resourceful. You are not put off
by struggle and undeterred by setbacks. If your work doesn't feel like play, it is not worth doing.
Your serotonin nature is ideal for professions requiring motor skills, hand-eye coordination,
flexibility, and crisis management. Tools are extensions of the serotonin brain. Construction
workers, oil riggers, truck and ambulance drivers, military personnel, hairstylists, bartenders,
pilots, and computer programmers ­ who get to play with the most advanced and expensive
tools ­ are all likely to have a serotonin nature. Professional athletes, movie stars,
photographers, and fashion models might also have serotonin natures. Serotonin dominance
would also be essential for trouble-shooting business executives hired to save floundering
companies; for surgeons, orthopedists, and chiropractors; for detectives and investigators; and

                                                                                                                     5
for specialists in crisis intervention. If there is excitement anywhere, you will find it, whether it be
parties, celebrations, video games, casino gambling, mountain climbing, hunting, skydiving,
hang-gliding, skiing, or scuba diving. You are passionate in your relationships, but refuse to be
tied down. It is important that those close to you recognize your need for freedom. You can be
the life of the party; you can be cheerful, optimistic, and easygoing. You want everyone to join in
and be part of your fun. You may have a special fondness for children, although you may be
overwhelmed by the commitment needed to care for them. You delight in playing with them, and
the roles of a favorite aunt, uncle or grandparent appeal the most to you. You are intensely loyal
to coworkers, friends, and family. People appreciate your practical side and the way you make
the best of any situation. You have many and varied friendships, but they may be more broad
than deep. Your impulsivity and desire for new experiences may move you away before deeper
roots are formed. You disdain order and routine, and with your love for independence, this can
put a strain on your closest relationships. When you are maximizing your serotonin mature, you
experience serenity throughout the day. You experience highs doing what others consider
dangerous, such as bungee jumping, motorboat racing, whitewater rafting, motorcycling, or just
staying out all night carousing. When you play hard, your body is in serotonin overdrive, and you
are having the time of your life.
TOO MUCH SEROTONIN Producing too much serotonin can make you extremely nervous. You
can become hesitant, distracted, vulnerable to any manner of criticism, and morbidly afraid of
being disliked. In the extreme, someone with an excessive serotonin personality is painfully shy
and sees himself as inadequate and inferior. Such people are plagued by sadness, anger, and a
desperate desire for interpersonal interaction, which, ironically, they are too fearful to attempt.

                                                                                                                     6
Total Number of 4B True Responses   DOPAMINE DEFICIENCY
                                    ACETYLCHOLINE DEFICIENCY
Deficiency Results Summary          GABA DEFICIENCY
                                    SEROTONIN DEFICIENCY
1B Total Number of True Responses:
2B Total Number of True Responses:
3B Total Number of True Responses:
4B Total Number of True Responses:

This test and the following recommendations are taken directly from Dr. Eric R. Braverman's
book, "The Edge Effect: Achieve Total Health and Longevity with the Balanced Brain Advantage"
New York: Sterling Publications, 2005.

Deficient dopamine Early warning signs are loss of energy, fatigue, sluggishness, memory loss,
or the blues.

Physical issues: Anemia, balance problems, blood sugar instability, bone density loss,
carbohydrate cravings, decreased appetite, decreased strength, diabetes, diarrhea, anorgasmia,
digestion problems, hypersomnia, head and facial tremors, high blood pressure, hyperglycemia,
joint pain, kidney problems, light-headedness, low libido, narcolepsy, obesity, Parkinson's, slow
metabolism, slow rigid movements, substance abuse, sugar cravings, tension, tremors, thyroid
problems, swallowing problems.
Personality Issues: Aggression, anger, carelessness, depression, fear of being observed, guilt,
hopelessness, worthlessness, pleasure-seeking behavior, stress intolerance, social isolation,
mood swings, procrastination, self-destructive thoughts.
Memory Issues: Distractibility, lack of follow-through, forgetfulness, lack of working memory, poor
abstract thinking, slow processing speed.
Attention Issues: ADD, decreased alertness, failure to finish tasks, hyperactivity, impulsive
behavior, poor concentration.

Dopamine Boosters for Brain Energy

               Minor Deficit (0-5)  Moderate Deficit (6-15)  Major Deficit (15+)
                                    1000 mg                  1000-2000 mg
Phenylalanine  500 mg               1000 mg                  1000-2000 mg
                                    500 mg                   1000 mg
Tyrosine       500 mg               100 mg                   200 mg
                                    10 mg                    50 mg
Methionine     250 mg               50 mg                    100 mg
                                    100 mg                   200 mg
Rhodiola       50 mg                75 mg                    100 mg

Pyroxidine     5 mg

B complex      25 mg

Phosphatidylserine 50 mg

Ginko Biloba   50 mg

Dietary modifications can boost dopamine as well. Increase your intake of phenylalanine and tyrosine (use
Equal as a sugar substitute), eat chicken, cottage cheese, eggs, pork, ricotta cheese, soybean products,
turkey, walnuts, wheat germ, granola, oats, duck, and milk and yogurt.

To prevent dopamine burnout, practice deep breathing (from abdomen), alternating nostrils, watch non-
violent movies and TV shows, weight lifting 3 times per week. Prevent exposure to lead and cadmium.
Stop smoking. A cup or two of caffeine in the morning is a very common way to increase dopamine,
however this can cause insomnia or tremors if dosage is too high or it is taken too late in the day.

Deficient Acetylcholine Acetylcholine controls your brain speed and the rate at which electrical signals
are processed, connecting your physical experiences to memories and thoughts. When your brain speed

                                                                                                          9
slows with deficient acetylcholine, the brain does not have time to connect all the new stimuli to previously
stored information, so it is discarded when the new information pours in. Your recall may become spotty,
and you may not react to sensory stimuli as fast as before. This causes forgetfulness.

Physical Issues: Agitation, Alzheimers, anxiety, arthritis, autism, high cholesterol, decreased sexual ability,
diabetes, problems urinating, dry cough, dry mouth, dyslexia, frequent urination, eye disorders, fat
cravings, frequent bowel movements, glaucoma, lack of arousal, inflammatory problems, multiple
sclerosis, osteoporosis, reading/writing disorders, slowness of movement, speech problems
Personality Issues Bipolar disorder, math errors, changes in personality and language, hysterical behavior,
mood swings, rule breaking.
Memory Issues: Learning disorders, loss of immediate visual and verbal memory, memory disturbance,
memory lapses.
Attention Issues: Attention problems, difficulty concentrating, diminished comprehension, impaired abstract
thinking, impaired creativity.

Acetylcholine Boosters

                    Minor Deficit (0-5)  Moderate Deficit (6-15)  Major Deficit (15+)
                                         200 mg                   500 mg
Choline (GPC choline) 100 mg             1000 mg                  2000 mg
                                         100 mg                   200 mg
Phosphatidylcholine 500 mg               500 mg                   1000 mg
                                         500 mg                   1000 mg
Phosphatidylserine 50 mg
                                         50 mg                    100 mg
Acetyl-l-carnitine  250 mg               50 mg                    100 mg
                                         200 mcg                  500 mcg
DHA                 200 mg               500 mcg                  1000 mcg
                                         100 mcg                  200 mcg
(Docosahexaenoic acid)                   75 mg                    100 mg
                                         200 mg                   500 mg
Thiamine            25 mg

Pantothenic Acid    25 mg

Vitamin B12         100 mcg

Taurine             250 mcg

Huperzine-A         50 mcg

Ginko Biloba        50 mg

Korean Ginseng      100 mg

Deficient GABA Gaba is produced in the temporal lobes and is associated throughout the brain with
calming, rhythmic theta waves ­ the "idling frequency" of neurons. GABA is the major inhibitory
neurotransmitter of the brain, which keeps all of the other biochemicals in check. GABA controls the
brains rhythm so that you function mentally and physically at a steady pace. When your rhythm is thrown
off by a GABA deficiency, you may begin to feel anxious, nervous, or irritable. Without enough GABA,
your brain produces energy in bursts, which impacts your emotional well-being.

Physical Issues: Tremors, allergies, appetite changes, backache, blurred vision, carbohydrate cravings,
chest pain, clammy hands, constipation, decreased libido, diarrhea, difficulty swallowing, dizziness, dry
mouth, excessive sleepiness, headache, hypertension, hyperventilation, insomnia, irritable bowel
syndrome, muscle loss, muscle tension, nausea, night sweats, parethesias, PMS, protein cravings,
seizures, shortness of breath, stroke, heart palpitations, ringing in ears, trembling, twitching, urinary
frequency.
Personality Issues: Problems adjusting to stress, anxiety, depression, feelings of dread, excessive guilt,
worthlessness, hopelessness, emotional immaturity, manic depression, obsessive compulsive disorder,
phobias, rage, restlessness, thoughts of suicide, psychosis.
Memory Issues: Poor verbal memory, global memory problems.
Attention Issues: Difficulty concentrating, disorganized attention pattern associated with anxiety, high
anxiety, impulsive attention errors (jumping the gun, erratic driving), inability to think clearly.

                                                                                                            10
GABA Boosters         Minor Deficit (0-5)   Moderate Deficit (5-15) Major Deficit (15+)
                      500 mg
Inositol              100 mg                1000 mg  2000 mg
GABA (not well-
                      250 mg                500 mg   1000 mg
          absorbed)   1 mg
Glutamic Acid         200 mg                500 mg   1000 mg
Melatonin (at night)  25 mg                 2 mg     3-6 mg
Thiamine              5 mg                  400 mg   600 mg
Niacinamide           100 mg                100 mg   500 mg
Pyridoxine            200 mg                10 mg    50 mg
Valerian root                               200 mg   500 mg
Passionflower                               500 mg   1000 mg

Serotonin Deficiency Serotonin is produced in great quantities in the occipital lobes and helps
create the neurological electricity for sight and rest, and also controls your cravings. The
occipital lobes maintain your brain's overall balance, or synchrony, by regulating the output of all
the primary brain waves. The four brain waves appear in varying combinations throughout the
day, but at night serotonin allows the brain to recharge and rebalance. If these brain waves are
out of sync, the left and right sides of your brain will be out of balance, and you might feel like
you are going off the edge; you are overtired, out of control, and unable to get a restful sleep.
When serotonin is unbalanced, your brain's ability to recharge itself is compromised. Serotonin
burnout can occur from experiencing too much excitement or not getting enough sleep. When
this happens, you simply cannot think clearly.

Physical Issues: Aches and soreness, allergies, arthritis, backache, blurred vision, carbohydrate
cravings, clammy hands, constipation or diarrhea, difficulty swallowing, dizziness, drug or alcohol
addiction, drug reactions, dry mouth, hallucinations, headaches, high pain/pleasure threshold,
hypersensitivity, excessive sleeping, hypertension, insomnia, muscle tension, nausea, night
sweats, palpitations, parethesias, PMS, premature ejaculation, premature orgasm for women,
salt cravings, tachycardia, ringing in ears, tremors, urinary frequency, vomiting, weight gain.
Personality Issues: Codependency, depersonalization, depression, impulsiveness, lack of artistic
appreciation, lack of common sense, lack of pleasure, social isolation, masochistic tendencies,
obsessive compulsive disorder, paranoia, perfectionism, phobias, rage, self-absorption, shyness.
Memory Issues: Confusion, memory loss, too many ideas to manage.
Attention Issues: Difficulty concentrating, hypervigilance, restlessness, slow reaction time.

Serotonin Boosters

                      Minor Deficits (0-5)  Moderate Deficits (6-15)  Major Deficits (15+)
                                            750 mg                    1000 mg
Calcium               500 mg                1000 mg                   2000 mg

Fish oil (pharmaceutical 500 mg             200 mg                    400 mg

       grade)                               400 mg                    600 mg
                                            ½-2 mg                    1-6 mg
5-HTP (with           100 mg                500 mg                    1000 mg
                                            10 mg                     50 mg
       decarboxylase inhibitor)             100 mg                    200 mg
                                            400 mg                    600 mg
Magnesium             200 mg
                                            1000 mg                   1500-2000 mg
Melatonin (at night) 1/3 mg                 30 mg                     45 mg

Passionflower         200 mg

Pyridoxine            5 mg

SAM-e                 50 mg

St. John's Wort       200 mg

Tryptophan (prescription) 500 mg

Zinc                  15 mg

                                                                                            11
