THE BRAVERMAN NATURE ASSESSMENT
Part 2 Defining your Deficiencies

( From The Edge Effect by Eric Braverman, 2005)

NAME:                                            DATE:

Instructions: Answer each question with True or False.

This second assessment will determine if you are deficient in any of the four biochemicals,
including the one that governs your nature.
Many of the questions relate to symptoms you might be experiencing.
Answer the questions in terms of how you feel right now; it doesn't matter how long you've been experiencing these symptoms,
or even if they occurred today for the first time.

Enter your totals below:                                      Total

1B. Total number of TRUE responses: dopamine deficiency
2B. Total number of TRUE responses: acetylcholine deficiency
3B. Total number of TRUE responses: GABA deficiency
4B. Total number of TRUE responses: serotonin deficiency

Circle the highest number. This is your most deficient nature and the one that is most likely to cause
symptoms.

Your deficient nature can be the same as or different from your dominant nature. In fact, you'll most likely recognize deficits in
your dominant nature sooner than you would in other aspects of your biochemistry simply because you are used to behaving
and feeling a specific way. You burn out your edge just by being yourself. For example:

      Dopamine natures can push themselves too hard.
      Serotonin natures are known to overindulge, especially with alcohol, which would also lead to a biochemical imbalance.
      When GABA natures don't get enough sleep, they create problems for

          themselves.
      Overworking all of the other biochemicals will burn out your acetylcholine.

Balance your most deficient nature first. Then balance the other three to reach the Ultimate Edge Effect.

Any category with up to 5 true statements is considered a minor deficiency. Any category with between 6 and 15 true statements
is considered a moderate deficiency.

If you have more than 15 true statements in anyone category, this indicates a major deficiency ­ it is recommended that you
get your doctor involved as soon as possible as you might need medication other than nutritional supplements.

Minor deficits are the early warning signs of health problems. If ignored, they will eventually lead to more serious deficiencies,
ultimately affecting your dominant nature, even if they occurred in another nature.

If you fall into the moderate deficit range, you probably have already sought medical treatment for any number of ailments
related to that deficiency. Minor and moderate deficits can be treated without medications and usually respond to a
combination of natural/nutritional, hormonal, and lifestyle changes.
1B                                                                       True False
Memory and Attention
I have trouble paying consistent attention and concentrating
I need caffeine to wake up
I cannot think quickly enough
I do not have a good attention span
I have trouble getting through a task even when it is interesting to me
I am slow in learning new ideas

Physical
I crave sugar
I have decreased libido
I sleep too much
I have a history of alcohol or addiction
I have recently felt worn out for no apparent reason
I sometimes experience total exhaustion without even exerting myself
I have always battled weight problems
I have little motivation for sexual experiences
I have trouble getting out of bed in the morning
I have had a craving for cocaine, amphetamines, or Ecstasy

Personality
I feel fine just following others
People seem to take advantage of me
I am feeling very down or depressed
People have told me I am too mellow
I have little urgency
I let people criticize me
I always look to others to lead me

Character
I have lost my reasoning skills
I can't make good decisions

Total number of TRUE responses:
2B                                                                             True False
Memory and Attention
I lack imagination
I have difficulty remembering names when I first meet people
I have noticed that my memory ability is decreasing
My significant other tells me I don't have romantic thoughts
I can't remember my friends' birthdays
I have lost some of my creativity

Physical
I have insomnia
I have lost muscle tone
I don't exercise anymore
I crave fatty foods
I have experimented with hallucinogens or other illicit drugs
I feel like my body is falling apart
I can't breathe easily

Personality
I don't feel joy very often
I feel despair
I protect myself from being hurt by others by never telling much about myself
I find it more comfortable to do things alone rather than in a large group
Other people get angrier about bothersome things than I do
I give in easily and tend to be submissive
I rarely feel passionate about anything
I like routine

Character
I don't care about anyone's stories but mine
I don't pay attention to people's feelings
I don't feel buoyant
I'm obsessed with my deficiencies

Total number of TRUE responses:
3B                                                                                         True False
Memory and Attention
I find it difficult to concentrate because I'm nervous and jumpy
I can't remember phone numbers
I have trouble finding the right word
I have trouble remembering things when I am put on the spot
I know I am intelligent, but it is hard to show others
My ability to focus comes and goes
When I read, I find I have to go back over the same paragraph a few times to absorb the
information
I am a quick thinker but can't always say what I mean
Physical
I feel shaky
I sometimes tremble
I have frequent backaches and/or headaches
I tend to have shortness of breath
I tend to have heart palpitations
I tend to have cold hands
I sometimes sweat too much
I am sometimes dizzy
I often have muscle tension
I tend to get butterflies in my stomach
I crave bitter foods
I am often nervous
I like yoga because it helps me to relax
I often feel fatigued even when I have had a good night's sleep
I overeat
Personality
I have mood swings
I enjoy doing many things at one time, but I find it difficult to decide what to do first
I tend to do things just because I think they'd be fun
When things are dull, I always try to introduce some excitement
I tend to be fickle, changing my mood and thoughts frequently
I tend to get overly excited about things
My impulses tend to get me into a lot of trouble
I tend to be theatrical and draw attention to myself
I speak my mind no matter what the reaction of others may be
I sometimes have fits of rage and then feel terribly guilty
I often tell lies to get out of trouble
I have always had less interest than the average person in sex
Character
I don't play by the rules anymore
I have lost many friends
I can't sustain romantic relationships
I consider the law arbitrary and without reason
I now consider rules that I used to follow ridiculous

Total number of TRUE responses:
4B                                                                        True False
Memory and attention
I am not very perceptive
I can't remember things that I have seen in the past
I have a slow reaction time
I have a poor sense of direction

Physical
I have night sweats
I have insomnia
I tend to sleep in many different positions in order to feel comfortable
I always awake early in the morning
I can't relax
I wake up at least two times per night
It is difficult for me to fall back asleep when I am awakened
I crave salt
I have less energy to exercise
I am sad

Personality
I have chronic anxiety
I am easily irritated
I have thoughts of self-destruction
I have had suicidal thoughts in my life
I tend to dwell on ideas too much
I am sometimes so structured that I become inflexible
My imagination takes over
Fear grips me

Character
I can't stop thinking about the meaning of life
I no longer want to take risks
The lack of meaning in my life is painful to me

Total number of TRUE responses:
