S.T.A.R.S of WellnessTM Dr. Laurie Mastrogianis             www.starsofwellness.com

                            Braverman Nature Assessment

                                                    Neurotransmitters

The following Braverman Nature self-assessment instrument is provided for participants of
S.T.A.R.S. of Wellness programs as a means of gauging brain-based influences upon mental
health and functionality. The scores are to be interpreted with input from your professional team
of health care providers and are not intended as a substitute for medical treatment. In addition,
blood tests are considered the most accurate means of assessing neurotransmitters. This
assessment instrument can be used for preventive measures as well as for tailoring your
treatment specifically to your brain-based behaviors and current neurotransmitter functionality.
In addition to bringing the results to your next counseling session, we encourage you to also
share them with the professionals who are instrumental in supporting your mental health care
needs.

   Instructions

Answer each question by choosing either True or False.

Answer the questions in terms of how you fee50l .m00o0s0t00o0f0the time, not just today. For example, if
you've had a bad night's sleep and feel tired today answer the questions that pertain to your

energy levels based on how you feel on a more average day.
      .
.

Option 1: Print out this form and complete the Assessment manually.
You record only the number of TRUE responses at the end of each group (there are 8 groups).
There is a section at the end to record the number from each group and total all of the groups.

Option 2: Complete this form on your computer.
The results will be automatically calculated and displayed at the end of the assessment. The
summary area indicates if you have left any of the questions unanswered by displaying the
#Blank number by each Group Total.

  Remember to print the results (page 13) and bring in for a review in session.

   1
S.T.A.R.S of WellnessTM Dr. Laurie Mastrogianis          www.starsofwellness.com

PART 1: Determining Your Dominant Nature

1A / Dominant Nature                                                            True False

Memory and Attention

I find it easy to process my thoughts.
I concentrate effectively.
I am a deep thinker.
I am a quick thinker.
I become distracted because I do so many tasks at once.
I enjoy intense debate.
I have a good imagination.
I tend to criticize and analyze my thoughts.

Physical                                                                        True False

I have a lot of energy most of the time.
My blood pressure is often elevated.
Sometimes in my life I have had episodes of extreme energy.
I have insomnia.
I find exercising invigorating.
I don't ordinarily need coffee to jump-start me in the morning.
My veins are visible and tend to look as though they might pop out of my skin.
I tend to have a high body temperature.
I eat my lunch while I am working.
I engage in sexual intercourse any chance I get.
I have a temper.
I eat only to re-energize my body.
I love action movies.
Exercising makes me feel powerful.

Personality                                                                     True False

I am a very domineering individual.
I sometimes don't notice my feelings.
I often have trouble listening to others because my own ideas dominate.
I have been in many physical altercations.
I tend to be future-oriented.
I am sometimes speculative.
Most people view me as thinking-oriented.
I daydream and often fantasize.

2
S.T.A.R.S of WellnessTM Dr. Laurie Mastrogianis              www.starsofwellness.com

1A / Dominant Nature

I like to read history and other nonfiction books.
I admire ingenuity.
I can be slow in identifying how people can cause trouble.
I don't usually get tricked by people who say they need my help.
Most people view me as innovative.
People have thought I have had some strange ideas, but I can always explain
the basis for them rationally.
I am often agitated or irritated.
Little things make me anxious or upset.
I have fantasies of unlimited power.
I love spending money.
I dominate others in my relationships.
I am very hard on myself.
I react aggressively to criticism; often becoming defensive in front of others.

Character                                                                                 True False

Some individuals view me as tough-minded.                    Section 1A TOTAL
Most people view me as achievement-oriented.
Some people say that I am irrational.                                       (Trues only)
I will do anything to reach a goal.
I value a religious philosophy.
Incompetence makes me angry.
I have high standards for myself and for others.

2A / Dominant Nature                                                             True False

Memory and Attention

My memory is very strong.
I am an excellent listener.
I am good at remembering stories.
I usually do not forget a face.
I am very creative.
I have an excellent attention span and rarely miss a thing.
I have many good hunches.
I notice everything going on around me.
I have a good imagination.

                                                          3
S.T.A.R.S of WellnessTM Dr. Laurie Mastrogianis                      www.starsofwellness.com

2A / Dominant Nature                                                 True False
                                                                     True False
Physical

I tend to have a slow pulse.
My body has excellent tone.
I have a great figure/build.
I have low cholesterol.
When I eat, I love to experience the aromas and the beauty of food.
I love yoga and stretching my muscles.
During sex I am very sensual.
I have had an eating disorder at some point in my life.
I have tried many alternative remedies.

Personality

I am a perpetual romantic.
I am in touch with my feelings.
I tend to make decisions based on hunches.
I like to speculate.
Some people say I have my head in the clouds.
I love reading fiction.
I have a rich fantasy life.
I am creative when solving people problems.
I am very expressive; I like to talk about what's bothering me.
I am buoyant.
I believe that it is possible to have a mystical experience.
I believe in being a soul mate.
Sometimes the mystical can excite me.
I tend to overreact to my body.
I find it easy to change; I am not set in my ways.
I am deeply in touch with my emotions.
I tend to love someone one minute and hate him or her the next.
I am flirtatious.
I don't mind spending money if it benefits my relationships.
I tend to fantasize when I'm having sex.
My relationships tend to be filled with romance.
I love watching romantic movies.
I take risks in my love life.

4
S.T.A.R.S of WellnessTM Dr. Laurie Mastrogianis                      www.starsofwellness.com

2A / Dominant Nature

Character                                                                        True  False

I foresee a better future.
I am inspired to help other people.
I believe that all things are possible, particularly for those who are devoted.
I am good at creating harmony between people.
Charity and altruism come from the heart, and I have plenty of both.
Others think me of as having vision.
My thoughts on religion often change.
I am an idealist, but not a perfectionist.
I'm happy with someone who just treats me right.

                      Section 2A TOTAL

3A / Dominant Nature                                                             True False
                                                                                 True False
Memory and Attention

I have a stable attention span and can follow other people's logic.
I enjoy reading people more than books.
I retain most of what I hear.
I can remember facts people tell me.
I learn from my experiences.
I am good at remembering names.
I can focus very well on tasks and people's stories.

Physical

I find it easy to relax.
I am a calm person.
I find it easy to fall asleep at night.
I tend to have high physical endurance.
I have low blood pressure.
I do not have a family history of stroke.
When it comes to sex, I am not very experimental.
I have little muscle tension.
Caffeine has little effect on me.
I sleep well.
I don't have many harmful food cravings such as sugar.
Exercising is a regimented habit for me.
I take my time eating meals.

                                                          5
S.T.A.R.S of WellnessTM Dr. Laurie Mastrogianis           www.starsofwellness.com

3A / Dominant Nature                                                                              True False

Personality

I am not very adventurous.
I do not have a temper.
I have a lot of patience.
I don't enjoy philosophy.
I love watching sitcoms about families.
I dislike movies about other worlds or universes.
I am not a risk taker.
I keep past experiences in mind before I make decisions.
I am a realistic person.
I believe in closure.
I like facts and details.
When I make a decision, it's permanent.
I like to plan my day, week, month, etc.
I collect things.
I am a little sad.
I'm afraid of confrontations and altercations.
I save up a lot of money in the event of a crisis.
I tend to create strong, lasting bonds with others.
I am a stable pillar in people's lives.

Character                                                                                         True  False

I believe in the adage 'Early to bed, early to rise.'
I believe in meeting deadlines.
I try to please others the best I can.
I am a perfectionist.
I am good at maintaining long-lasting relationships.
I pay attention to where my money goes.
I believe that the world would be more peaceful if people would improve their
morals.
I am very loyal and devoted to my loved ones.
I have high ethical standards that I live by.
I pay close attention to laws, principles, and policies.
I believe in participating in service for the community.

                                                                                Section 3A TOTAL

6
S.T.A.R.S of WellnessTM Dr. Laurie Mastrogianis   www.starsofwellness.com

4A / Dominant Nature                                                              True False

Memory and Attention

I can easily concentrate on manual-labor tasks.
I have a good visual memory.
I am very perceptive.
I am an impulsive thinker.
I live in the here and now.
I tend to say, 'Tell me the bottom line.'.
I am a slow book learner, but I learn easily from experience.
I need to experience something or work at it hands-on in order to understand it.

Physical                                                                          True False

I sleep too much.
When it comes to sex, I am very experimental.
I have very low blood pressure.
I am very action-oriented.
I am very handy around the house.
I am very active outdoors.
I engage in daring activities such as skydiving and motorcycle riding.
I can solve problems spontaneously.
I rarely have carbohydrate cravings.
I usually grab a quick meal on the run.
I'm not very consistent with my exercise routine; I may exercise daily for three
weeks and then skip it for a month.

Personality                                                                       True False

I live life in the immediate moment.
I like to perform/entertain in public.
I tend to gather facts in an unorganized manner.
I am very flexible.
I am a great negotiator.
I often just like to 'eat, drink, and be merry.'
I am dramatic.
I am very artistic.
I am a good craftsman.
I'm a risk taker when it comes to sports.
I believe in psychics.
I can easily take advantage of others.
I am cynical of others' philosophies.

7
S.T.A.R.S of WellnessTM Dr. Laurie Mastrogianis  www.starsofwellness.com

4A / Dominant Nature

I like to have fun.
My favorite types of movies are horror flicks.
I am fascinated with weapons.
I rarely stick to a plan or agenda.
I have trouble remaining faithful.
I am easily able to separate and move on when relationships with loved ones
end.
I don't pay much attention to how I spend my money.
I have many frivolous relationships.

Character                                                                                         True  False

I always keep my options open in case something better comes up.
I don't like working hard for long periods of time.
I believe things should have a function and purpose.
I am optimistic.
I live in the moment.
I pray only when I'm in need of spiritual support.
I don't have particularly high morals and ethical values.
I do what I want, when I want to.
I don't care about being perfect; I just live my life.
Savings are for suckers.

                                                                                Section 4A TOTAL

PART 2: Defining Your Deficiencies

Instructions: The second assessment will determine if you are deficient in any of the four bio-
chemicals, including the one that governs your nature. Many of the questions relate to symptoms you
might be experiencing. Answer the questions in terms of how you feel right now; it doesn't matter how
long you've been experiencing these symptoms, or even if they occurred today for the first time.

1B / Defining Your Deficiencies                                                                   True False

Memory and Attention

I have trouble paying consistent attention and concentrating.
I need caffeine to wake up.
I cannot think quickly enough.
I do not have a good attention span.
I have trouble getting through a task even when it is interesting to me.
I am slow in learning new ideas..

8
S.T.A.R.S of WellnessTM Dr. Laurie Mastrogianis                www.starsofwellness.com

1B / Defining Your Deficiencies                                        True False

Physical

I crave sugar.
I have decreased libido.
I sleep too much.
I have a history of alcohol or addiction.
I have recently felt worn out for no apparent reason.
I sometimes experience total exhaustion without even exerting myself.
I have always battled weight problems.
I have little motivation for sexual experiences.
I have trouble getting out of bed in the morning.
I have had a craving for cocaine, amphetamines, or Ecstasy.

Personality                                                            True False

I feel fine just following others.
People seem to take advantage of me.
I am feeling very down or depressed.
People have told me I am too mellow.
I have little urgency.
I let people criticize me.
I always look to others to lead me.

Character                                                             True False
                                      Section 1B TOTALS
I have lost my reasoning skills.
I can't make good decisions.

  2B / Defining Your Deficiencies                                      True False
Memory and Attention

I lack imagination.
I have difficulty remembering names when I first meet people.
I have noticed that my memory ability is decreasing.
My significant other tells me I don't have romantic thoughts.
I can't remember my friends' birthdays.
I have lost some of my creativity.

                                                          9
S.T.A.R.S of WellnessTM Dr. Laurie Mastrogianis                 www.starsofwellness.com

  2B / Defining Your Deficiencies                                               True False
Physical

I have insomnia.
I have lost muscle tone.
I don't exercise anymore.
I crave fatty foods.
I have experimented with hallucinogens or other illicit drugs.
I feel like my body is falling apart.
I can't breathe easily.

Personality                                                                     True False

I don't feel joy very often.
I feel despair.
I protect myself from being hurt by others by never telling much about myself.
I find it more comfortable to do things alone rather than in a large group.
Other people get angrier about bothersome things than I do.
I give in easily and tend to be submissive.
I rarely feel passionate about anything.
I like routine.

Character                                                                                     True False

I don't care about anyone's stories but mine.                   Section 2B TOTAL
I don't pay attention to people's feelings.
I don't feel buoyant.                                                          (Trues only)
I'm obsessed with my deficiencies.

3B / Defining Your Deficiencies                                                 True False

Memory and Attention

I find it difficult to concentrate because I'm nervous.
I can't remember phone numbers.
I have trouble finding the right words.
I have trouble remembering things when I am put on the spot.
I know I am intelligent, but it is hard to show others.
My ability to focus comes and goes.
When I read, I find I have to go back over the same paragraph a few times to
absorb the information.
I am a quick thinker but can't always say what I mean.

                                               10
S.T.A.R.S of WellnessTM Dr. Laurie Mastrogianis                   www.starsofwellness.com

3B / Defining Your Deficiencies                                                      True False

Physical

I feel shaky.
I sometimes tremble.
I have frequent backaches and/or headaches.
I tend to have shortness of breath.
I tend to have heart palpitations.
I tend to have cold hands.
I sometimes sweat too much.
I am sometimes dizzy.
I often have muscle tension.
I tend to get butterflies in my stomach.
I crave bitter foods.
I am often nervous.
I like yoga because it helps me to relax
I often feel fatigued even when I have had a good night's sleep.
I overeat.

Personality                                                                          True False

I have mood swings.
I enjoy doing many things at one time, but I find it difficult to decide what to do
first.
I tend to do things just because I think they'd be fun.
When things are dull, I always try to introduce some excitement.
I tend to be fickle, changing my mood and thoughts frequently.
I tend to get overly excited about things.
My impulses tend to get me into a lot of trouble.
I tend to be theatrical and draw attention to myself
I speak my mind no matter what the reaction of others may be.
I sometimes have fits of rage and then feel terribly guilty.
I often tell lies to get out of trouble.
I have always had less interest than the average person in sex.

Character                                                                                   True False

I don't play by the rules anymore.                           Section 3B TOTAL:
I have lost many friends.
I can't sustain romantic relationships.                                      (Trues only)
I consider the law arbitrary and without reason.
I now consider rules that I used to follow ridiculous.

                                                         11
S.T.A.R.S of WellnessTM Dr. Laurie Mastrogianis         www.starsofwellness.com

4B / Defining Your Deficiencies                                            True False

Memory and Attention

I am not very perceptive.
I can't remember things that I have seen in the past.
I have a slow reaction time.
I have a poor sense of direction.

Physical                                                                   True False

I have night sweats.
I have insomnia.
I tend to sleep in many different positions in order to feel comfortable.
I always awake early in the morning.
I can't relax.
I wake up at least two times per night.
It is difficult for me to fall back asleep when I am awakened.
I crave salt.
I have less energy to exercise.
I am sad.

Personality                                                                True False

I have chronic anxiety.
I am easily irritated.
I have thoughts of self-destruction.
I have had suicidal thoughts in my life.
I tend to dwell on ideas too much.
I am sometimes so structured that I become inflexible.
My imagination takes over.
Fear grips me.

Character                                                                             True False
                                                        Section 4B TOTAL:
I can't stop thinking about the meaning of life.
I no longer want to take risks.
The lack of meaning in my life is painful to me.

                                                  12
S.T.A.R.S of WellnessTM Dr. Laurie Mastrogianis  www.starsofwellness.com

                  Braverman Nature Assessment Total Results
Date: ______________________________
Name:______________________________
Comments:

                 Part 1 Results     #Blank

Group Totals                                  The category with the greatest number of true
                                              responses will identify your dominant nature
Section 1A =  Dopamnie Nature                  A classically dominant nature is typically a
Section 2A =  Acetylcholine Nature            score of 35 and above in any one category,
Section 3A =  GABA Nature                     which suggests a less-than-balanced life.
Section 4A =  Serotonin Nature
                                              Note: When any other nature is 10-15
                                              points lower than the dominant one, the
                                              nature with the lower score is probably a
                                              lifelong relative deficiency and needs balance
                                              even in times of good health

              Part 2 Results

Section 1B =  Dopamine Nature           The highest number is your most deficient
                                        nature, the one that is most likely to disrupt
Section 2B =  Acetylcholine Nature      your psychological functioning. Your deficient
                                        nature can be the same as or different from
Section 3B =  GABA Nature               your dominant nature. In fact, you'll most likely
                                        recognize deficits in your dominant nature
Section 4B =  Serotonin Nature          sooner than you would in other aspects of
                                        your bio-chemistry, simply because you are
                                        used to behaving and feeling a specific way.

                                 Computer Form Users:
Remember to print the results (page 13) and bring in for a review in session.

                                    13
S.T.A.R.S of WellnessTM Dr. Laurie Mastrogianis  www.starsofwellness.com

                   Concluding Summary about Neurotransmitters

These summaries are only reviews and suggestions related to brain-based human behaviors.

DOPAMINE--This is the brain neurotransmitter that is associated with high voltage BETA
waves and can result in high energy, powerfulness and reflexively fast responses. It mediates
motivation, interest, drive, and pleasure. Functionally, dopamine is associated with initiation of
movements as well as perception. Persons with dominance in this brain chemical frequently are
high achievers, leaders, goal-directed, and oriented to the rational aspects of life. Deficiencies
in psychological terms can be noticed in fatigue, burn-out, depression, compulsions and
addictions. Too much dopamine can lead to hallucinations and aggressive behaviors.

ACETYLCHOLINE--this neurotransmitter is produced in the parietal lobes and is associated
with language, intelligence/learning, and attention. It is prevalent throughout the body as well as
the brain and is responsible for memory and cognition. Persons strong in this neurotransmitter
tend to be creative, inquisitive, open-minded, quick thinking, intuitive, and innovative.
Deficiencies in psychological terms can be noticed in memory problems, loss of energy, apathy,
and loss of enthusiasm for learning. Too much acetylcholine can lead to paranoia and isolation.

GABA--Gamma-aminobutyric acid is an inhibitory neurotransmitter produced in the temporal
lobes and is associated with calming, rhythmic theta brain waves. Psychologically persons
strong in this neurotransmitter tend to be associated with routine, stability, calmness,
consistency, empathy, organizational skills, and reliability. Deficiencies can be noticed in terms
of increased anxiety, tremulousness, worry, loss of order, loss of stability, and a sense of
uncertainty. Too much GABA is associated with excessive caretaking, subjugation, and
enabling behaviors.

SEROTONIN--is considered one of the most complex neurotransmitters as it plays many roles
in the central nervous system. Produced in the occipital lobes, this neurotransmitter is
associated with re-synchronizing your brain so that every morning you wake up feeling
refreshed and rested. It is a key neurotransmitter for emotional stability and "feeling good."
Dominance in serotonin is associated with playfulness, easy going attitude, optimism, joy,
spontaneity, and serenity. Imbalances are associated with certain mood disorders, especially
depression. In the early stages, deficiencies can be noticed in terms of sleep difficulties, loss of
enthusiasm, joylessness, and poor judgment. Excessive serotonin is associated with extreme
nervousness, distractibility, and a tendency to be overly sensitive.

               PLEASE REVIEW YOUR RESULTS WITH YOUR HEALTH CARE TEAM
        Also, for more information about the science of brain-based neurotransmitter health,

                    please go to Dr. Braverman's website @ http://www.pathmed.com

                                                         14
